This word, Idea, I tried exploring where this
was originally from. And guess what, it comes
from the Greek and the Latin root, and the
meaning of that root? To see! And, not just
see without any purpose… To see and recognise
a pattern. That is an idea. To see and recognise
a pattern!
Namaste! Ennakkaru Mazhai! Not just one idea,
how to get a LOT of ideas! How to get a lot
of GOOD ideas! That is what we are going to
see today!
There is this book — How to get ideas — by
Jack Foster. This man… the book… is extremely
creative. Illustrations are amazing. And,
it is divided into two parts. The first part
is about how to get your mind ready for amazing
ideas. And, while talking about that, he says
things that we have already seen in all these
409 episodes. Nothing new really. But… the
way he says it.. The example he uses.. They
were really interesting, and I thought I should
share them, at least some of them, with you.
Ten ways to idea-condition your mind. To prepare
it. To get it ready. To keep it on the alert
so that if the idea “flies by”, you will
be able to immediately grab and catch it.
That is the question in front of us. And here
are ten beautiful answers.
Number One is Have fun! We have seen this
already. Because the funny mind is the creative
mind. We have seen a lot of examples for this.
He draws the concept of a joke. He says, “Hey,
take a look at this joke.” For example,
“What is the best thing about Switzerland?”
is the question. And, how do we give an answer
to that? How do we make it witty?!” “I
don’t know, but the flag is a big plus!”
Do you see the double meaning? In the last
turn? Suddenly a bulb glows and it makes it
funny! This is the characteristic of any joke!
The author catches on to this, and says, “An
unexpected direction change. A 180-degree
U-turn. Later, it sounds perfectly logical,
though. That is the key concept of a great
idea also, not just a joke.” In the 1970s,
there was this new concept that came along.
Regenerative Braking. It is by default installed
in any new electric car these days. When you
apply the brakes on your vehicle, instead
of losing the energy as heat, burnt rubber,
wear and tear, etc, imagine if we could convert
the kinetic energy of your vehicle into charge
for the battery, so it can be useful the next
time you want to accelerate! It is that unexpected
directional change, that later sounded, “Hey,
that’s perfectly logical, da!” So, have
fun, crack jokes, make way for ideas to come
and take hold of you.
Number Two is “Be more like a child”.
Like a child. Not childish. But, childlike.
Curiosity. We have seen numerous examples
— about capturing that childlike curiosity.
He uses one from Dr. Albert Einstein himself.
There have been countless stories about him,
and there are quite a few interesting stories
that feature him and his love for children.
In one of his interviews, he has said this:-
“Everybody when we were children, we ask
questions about time and space. How large
is this universe? How long will this still
be around? What happened long ago? How fast
is something? How heavy is something? We have
always been asking these questions as a child.
As we grow up, we stop asking those questions.
In my case, probably my development was retarded.
I didn’t grow up like everybody else. I
was retarded. And so, when I had the tools,
like calculus and other powerful tools, when
I had them in my hand, I was still asking
those childlike questions, and that is what
probably helped me!” He said this in all
humility. So, be more like a child. For a
child, if it enters an environment, every
day is a new day! Every environment is a new
environment. Remember the movie, 50 First
Dates? Like that! Can you be like that? That
may pave the way to a beautiful, idea-rich
world for you.
Number Three is to become “Idea-Prone”.
If it starts raining, it should POUR! How
do you do that? He gives an example of an
advertising agency. He works at an advertising
agency himself. Where, once, there was this
assignment. “We need to create this billboard,
and publish it tomorrow, for a Swiss Army
Knife”. They think of a lot of options and
alternatives, but all of them seem old and
usual. They are not able to come up with something
new. 24 hours pass by, nobody has any new
idea, for they were looking for one single
beautiful idea. The spec is changed… The
boss comes and says, “I need ten ideas from
each of you! By lunch time!” So, when a
time tension is added, a deadline is added,
and a large quantity is expected as the output,
some of them brought twenty five!! So, what’s
he trying to say? When you know that there
is a solution possible for a problem, the
way you approach the problem changes! When
you are wondering whether this problem even
has a solution or not, you approach it differently
from, when you know that this problem doesn’t
have just one solution but actually ten, and
let us come up with some! Similarly, push
away the self-doubt that echoes “Can I even
do this at all?” You have to tell yourself
that you can do it. So, there are two things
to keep in mind. First, there are many many
many solutions out there. And, the second,
YOU can get there! You can do it! That’s
how you make your psyche idea-prone.
Number Four is about visualising success.
We have heard of so many stories, read so
many books, about the power of creative visualisation.
You know what the examples he uses are? He
says, imagine you are walking along a very
narrow path. Just ten inches wide. Between
two tall buildings! They are calling you over.
“Come! Come to the other side!” You are
afraid. You are terrified. You are concerned
about the wind, concerned about the height,
concerned about one misstep, concerned about
the sweat on your forehead, concerned about
the crow that is coming towards you… But,
imagine this same scenario with just a small
twist. Your 12-week-old waif, that little
helpless baby is being dangled from the other
side. “Come! Or else..!” is the threat.
Will you go now? — asks the author. Yes
of course! And, what’s the difference? The
difference is the visualisation that you do
in the second scenario! What if the child
is dropped?! It is not about all the other
problems you were concerned about.. Your focus,
your visualisation, is about that end goal.
Just make that change to your approach. There
was an experiment, in a college. They conducted
this experiment on basketballer-girls. They
don’t know the game much, the sixty girls.
They are split into three groups of twenty.
The first twenty are trained from Day 1 to
Day 20. Their accurancy is measured on Day
1. Then again on Day 20. Free throw success
percentage is measured. Of course it has improved
for them. A full 24%. The second twenty, they
are measured on Day 1. The next twenty days
nothing much happens. No training. Nothing.
Twentieth day they are measured again. Of
course, zero percent improvement. But, you
know what was shocking?! The third twenty
of them, the coach said, “You don’t need
to come to the court.. But, visualise yourself
shooting. Visualise your body posture. Visualise
the ball going through the net. Hear that
swooshing sound as it slips without hitting
the ring. Hear the crowd applauding you!”
For twenty days, that’s what they did. Shock
of shocks!! Twenty-three percent improvement,
in free throw shooting percentage, just sitting
in a couch visualising! So, visualise the
end goal. Automatically ideas will come, he
says!
Number Five is about Rejoicing in Failure.
It is only through Failure can you actually
Win — is something we have seen often here.
We have also heard that Failure is the stepping
stone for Success. He brings, though, two
crucial professions. One of them is race car
driving. The other is that chef in that restaurant
who is experimenting. For both of these professionals,
success, the highest level of success, when
do they really realise that they have done
it, they have reached it? When there is a
crash for the racecar driver, he would tell
himself, “I should try all but this!”
When there is a disaster in the kitchen, “All
but this, I should try!”, the chef tells
himself. So, you have to explore the edges
of Failure before you know to define Success
for yourself. Isn’t that beautiful?!
Number Six is about getting more inputs! If
you want to become really good at something,
to be creative, you have to take inputs from
EVERYWHERE! One guy,… I will read it out
to you, it is so interesting…! His name
is Jeff Weakley. This guy had sent the most
interesting resume ever, to the author! So,
what was so special about the resume? Well,
it said, … The illustration showed a man’s
head piled high with junk — broken pencils,
old tires, bottles, and so on. The headline
said: “Invest in a junk pile.” The copy
said: “I read the labels on toothpaste tubes.
I have been a disc jockey. I have been a door-to-door
salesman. I have studied and worked with film,
television, radio, and photography. I play
sports, speak Spanish, and know the names
of all the teeth in my mouth. I have read
a lot of books and seen a lot of movies. I
know of a disease that causes men to eat dirt,
ice, and laundry starch. Most importantly,
I know something dual-in-line-package 14-pin
quad two-input NANS gates. I’ve always been
like that. I’ve created in my mind this
giant junk pile of seemingly worthless information.
And then I discovered advertising. The junk
pile became a treasure overnight. As I am
at the earliest stages of my advertising career,
I am offering you the opportunity to invest
in this junk pile. For a very good price.
If you’re interested in seeing the rest
of my collection, please call.” How interesting!!
Collect! Because, you never know when you
may be able to make some interesting connections
and come up with an amazing idea. Be a voracious
reader. Be a voracious observer!
Number Seven is about courage! You need guts.
You need the gumption to actually put it out
in the open. There are a lot many stories.
Rejection stories. About the number of failures
faced by Thomas Alva Edison, the number of
rejection slips that J K Rowling collected.
How to face rejection though? Instead, listen
to this story! In our office, there was this
review happening of creative ideas, and the
boss said, “Sorry, this is bad, come up
with another!” At that time, a colleague
gave me this good advice. It seems that guy
next to him said, “Wow, this is an opportunity
for us to come up with a better idea!” In
other words, you look at yourselves as an
engine that can keep creating ideas always
better than the previous one! For, if you
don’t create an idea as good as or better
than your previous one, you will be replaced!
You have to retire! So, as long as you are
pumping them out, “Wow!, an opportunity
to come up with even better!” should be
is the attitude.
Number Eight is about teaming up. Instead
of going it all the way alone, idea-brainstorming
should ideally include two/three people. Together!
The results will be usually special! As an
example, he quotes the Schick shaving foam
warming device. They had come up with an invention
to warm the shaving foam. If you apply it
on your cheek, it will be warm and comforting,
particularly if you live in cold countries.
Everything looked good, they surveyed potential
buyers, everybody seemed to want one, but
somehow, the product never sold in high numbers..
Wondering what to do, wondering why it wasn’t
selling, worried that the advertising was
perhaps below par, they brought the device
to this advertising agency. A small team had
been formed, they were discussing, they were
debating, and then, one of them, thankfully
a lady, she stood up and said, “Everything
is perfect, except that you are selling it
to the wrong people.. It is not to the men
that you should be selling this, it is to
the women who are looking for what to gift
their husband on the coming Christmas. It
is the perfect gift a woman can give a husband!”
So, this is the benefit you get when you have
some opposing minds, looking at the problem
from two different directions, arriving at
the solution in double quick speed… But,
wait, he does give two additional bits of
advice too. Don’t bring in too many cooks!
Decision by committee is always flawed! And,
similarly, brainstorming with your boss may
be a bad idea, because, brainstorming expects
you to be ready to be a fool, to be made an
ass..! Check if your boss is ready for such
treatment, or if you are ready for it in front
of your boss!
Number Nine is about Lateral Thinking. Think
different. Think from a different angle. The
example he quotes for this is a story from
a company in Korea. They set up an amazing
training department. They told their employees,
“We just need the right attitude. Even if
you walk in with zero skills, we will train
you, we will train you in all the skills needed,
we will do everything to make you a well-rounded
professional!” There was only one problem..
These people, after finishing their training,
they were poached by other companies in the
city. Why?! With such a consummate training
program, the other companies were ready to
pay twice, were ready to send a pickup limo
to their home, give skyhigh perks, gift an
iPhone to each employee, … they just wanted
the person to jump ship! They were taken away
by all those other companies who were probably
having more money, but who didn’t have as
good a training department as this company…
They worried, wondered, debated, what was
to be done about this, and then, one guy,
in exasperation, commented, “I think we
should take everybody into a room, and just
chop their legs off.. That may be the only
way to prevent them from walking off!” You
know what happened? Just a little extension
of that, just a few days later, that germ
of an idea germinated a little more, and this
Korean company decided they would recruit
only handicapped people on wheelchairs. Because,
their company was wheelchair-friendly. Sloped
access ways near staircases, wheelchair-compatible
elevators and toilets. The other companies
could not do that, and there was no way they
could recruit wheelchair-bound specialists.
How interesting?!
And, finally, Number Ten is about connection,
it is about combination. We have seen a lot
many examples, but the one this author gave
was pretty interesting! He said, we have always
had coin punches — from way back in the
times of kings and queens. Way back! Tens
of thousands of years ago! Similarly, the
winepress? The one that crushes the juice
out of grapes? That too, has been around for
hundreds and hundreds of years. But, it took
a person who knew how both of these work,
to bring them together creatively, and create
that Gutenberg printing press. The first printing
press. He was able to bring one idea from
somewhere, another idea from somewhere else,
bring these two creatively together, like
a mashup, and do this! Interesting!
My closing thought is actually an invitation,
to know more about this guy, Randall Munroe.
Randall Munroe is an author, a cartoonist,
a physicist, an engineer. Overall big shot!
Do you remember these cartoon stick figures?
Some of you may recall the association with
the XKCD series. He is the guy who produces
these daily! He has published them as books
too. Amazing books. One of them is called
“What if”. This book is filled with What
If questions.. Like, “How would it be to
swim in a swimming pool filled with nuclear
explosion residue fluid?” Like “If I were
to pitch a baseball at 90% the speed of light,
how will you swing at it?” Like “If every
human being on earth is taken to one location,
one island, and everybody press their foot
down strong and hard, at the same time, what
would happen?” For questions like these,
he gives answers, with proper proof and scientific
support, and with wit too! Go, get creative!
Thank you! And yes, we will meet again soon!
Bye bye!